# 2022 WCWS Participants - Background

Seeding is a big deal for NCAA softball post-season success. The top 16 seeds host a regional (4 teams), and the top 8 are expected to then host a super regional (2 teams), with those winners advancing onward to the Women’s College World Series (WCWS) (8 teams). Of course, upsets happen and underdogs prevail every season. This is why we love sports, right?

Last year, unranked James Madison University (JMU) did the unexpected and made it all the way to the semi-finals of the WCWS, after knocking off the #9 and #8 seeds and notching wins against the #5 seed and the eventual national champion, #1 seeded Oklahoma. The JMU Cinderella story took the softball world by storm and their ace in the circle eventually signed professional contracts, all because she took her team so deep into the tournament. But, how could a team that was so good be dramatically overlooked by the selection committee?

This year, of the 16 regional tournaments, 5 unseeded teams prevailed. Some of the biggest seeds bowed out early on, including #2 Florida State and #6 Alabama, both of whom were expected to make deep WCWS runs. Florida State was the 2021 national runner-up and Alabama’s ace threw a perfect game during the 2021 WCWS. Out of those 5 unseeded teams, 3 played in the WCWS. Two other teams that participated were not top-8 teams.

How did the selection committee get it so wrong this year? It is said that this committee takes strength of schedule and season success into account. This is why many teams look to play in competitive pre-season tournaments against ranked, big name programs to “boost their resume” for the committee’s post-season consideration. Strength of conference play is said to help, too. For example, the Southeast Conference (SEC) has dominated top-20 rankings all season, yet only one SEC team scraped in to the WCWS (#14 Florida).

Should the selection committee be weighing different metrics in their post-season seeding? Two teams in the WCWS, Texas and Arizona, had very rough starts to their seasons, yet crushed their competition in the post-season. In February and March, Texas had loses to teams that made bleak post-season runs. In April, Texas notched a win against #1 Oklahoma during the regular season, and then knocked off the #13 and #4 seeds during regionals and supers, respectively. Arizona began Pac-12 conference play with an 0-8 record, finished conference play near the bottom of the standings. Yet, they succeeded against the #15 seed and Mississippi State, the team that knocked off #2 Florida State.

February to May is only 4 months, but with the condensed schedule that many teams play, this stacks up to being a long, exhausting season. Maybe the selection committee needs to weigh more recent successes (April-May) in their seeding process. Perhaps they need to look at how teams are performing in the early versus late season, both defensively and offensively. Is a team performing well with hitting but their pitchers have began to struggle, or vice versa? Did their success peak too early? Are their star hitters beginning to slump? Have they pulled out decisive wins, or are they just barely hanging on? Have they been plagued by injuries? How many of their current players have post-season experience?

As fans, we’ll never know how the selection committee makes their seeding decisions. However, we can try to answer some of these questions by comparing early versus late season statistics and see if any patterns emerge with these unranked teams in the WCWS.

# Repository Contents
In this repository, I have started to scrape together answers to these questions. I started with a web scraping program (webscrape.py) to obtain softball stats from each of the participating teams in the 2022 WCWS (found in data.zip). After cleaning the data (clean.py), I started to explore and find patterns (exploration.py). These preliminary results can be seen in the figs directory.

win_loss_percentages.pdf: In this figure, I calculated a running win percentage for each of the WCWS participants throughout their respective seasons, with dots denoting regular season match-ups and x's denoting post-season competition. Texas played the most number of games, with Florida coming in second. Most teams played around 60 games this season. Oklahoma dominated their opponents, with a win percentage that never dropped below 95%. Both Oregon State and Arizona began their seasons with many losses and both found a recovery period around games 10-20, only to experience a losing record again later on in their respective regular seasons. While Texas had a losing early season, they showed steady improvement from game 18 onward into their late regular season. Florida began their season on a hot win-streak, but saw loses throughout their mid-season, presumably in SEC conference play. UCLA and Northwestern both had dominant regular seasons, finishing above .800.

regular_season_stats.pdf: In this figure, I took game-by-game statistics for the regular season and averaged them per month. This was done to get an idea of team performance monthly during the regular season. The columns on the left contain offensive data, including batting average, runs scored, and bases stolen (top to bottom). The columns on the right contain pitching data, including ERA, total runs allowed, and walks allowed (top to bottom). 
